                 TABLED DISCUSSIONS

This document is to record thoughts and points of discussion
that would otherwise dilute our efforts.  The random thoughts
listed in here will be brought up on the list when we are done
talking about the issues already on the table.


COMPONENT SECURITY MODEL
------------------------
Currently, there is no formal security model for Avalon or its
containers.  I think it is an oversight that we need to
eventually remedy.  A proper security manager would allow us
to leverage Java's security model to throw security exceptions
if a component tries to access an unauthorized component.
It would also allow a security administrator to provide the
same limitations to all components that implement a certain
role.

We need to formalize the concepts of trusted and untrusted
systems, and sandboxing the untrusted components.  That means
we need to make it easier to use signed components as well
as allow us to safely try to extend other components.

Another integration is the addition of encrypted configuration
data.  Certain information like usernames and passwords are
sensitive information that we don't want to trust the OS access
restriction model to protect.  There are so many ways of
getting around that, and so many broken OS's where that
protection is not trustworthy.


CONFIGURATION MANAGER
---------------------
We need a central configuration repository.  Its whole
responsibility is to check to see if the source configuration
has been altered, and to notify the container when it has.
At that time, the container can reconfigure all the components
at run time.  The contracts are between the container and
the Configuration manager--not the individual components.
We also need a way of storing any runtime changes to a
component's configuration so that we can reinitialize ourselves
properly the next time.


META / INFO MODEL
-----------------
We need a model to represent component metadata. Some ideas on
this have been codified in the containerkit, info, meta and
xfc modules. See there for more information.
It would be beneficial to share as much of any such model across
different containers as possible to make component portability
easy.


ONE CONTAINER TO RULE THEM ALL
------------------------------
There has been (and probably always will be) talk about creating
a single container that can take on the roles of all current
ones. There's also been talk about creating a "reference
implementation" of a container. If we were to succeed in this it
would make things more transparent for our users.


AVALON 5
--------
There was talk about and a proposal about a new non-backwards-
compatible version of avalon framework under the name "avalon 5";
there's a proposal on this in the jakarta-avalon cvs attic.
Mostly this would involve small changes only. Hence it isn't
really neccessary and has been put on hold indefinately.